---
layout: default
title: Z1
parent: Zerno
grand_parent: Manufacturers
---

# Zerno Z1: Frequently Asked Questions

- [Official FAQs](https://zerno.co/faq/)
- [User manual](https://store.zerno.co/pages/zerno-z1-manual)
- [Zerno Coffee maintenance and usage videos](https://www.youtube.com/@zerno.grinder/videos)

- [General usage](#general-usage)
   * [I’m having trouble adjusting the grind finer with the grinder off](#im-having-trouble-adjusting-the-grind-finer-with-the-grinder-off)
   * [How can I manage retention and exchange when grinding?](#how-can-i-manage-retention-and-exchange-when-grinding)
   * [How do I know if my Z1 has a ionizer? Why was one not included?](#how-do-i-know-if-my-z1-has-a-ionizer-why-was-one-not-included)
   * [Why are beans getting stuck before reaching the burrs? I’m using $number RDT sprays to reduce static](#why-are-beans-getting-stuck-before-reaching-the-burrs-im-using-number-rdt-sprays-to-reduce-static)
   * [What grind setting should I be using for X and Y with burrs Z?](#what-grind-setting-should-i-be-using-for-x-and-y-with-burrs-z)
   * [Why can’t I find a set screw for my funnel?](#why-cant-i-find-a-set-screw-for-my-funnel)
   * [How do I swap augers? I'd like to try the Slow-Feeding auger but I have no idea where to start](#how-do-i-swap-augers-id-like-to-try-the-slow-feeding-auger-but-i-have-no-idea-where-to-start)
   * [How coarse can I go? How far past 700um? How many full rotations can I make?](#how-coarse-can-i-go-how-far-past-700um-how-many-full-rotations-can-i-make)
- [Burrs, zeroing, and alignment](#burrs-zeroing-and-alignment)
   * [How do I remove the stationary and rotary burrs, and where can I find the magnets?](#how-do-i-remove-the-stationary-and-rotary-burrs-and-where-can-i-find-the-magnets)
   * [The stationary burr is stuck!](#the-stationary-burr-is-stuck)
   * [Why does my unit not have radial screws for the blind burrs?](#why-does-my-unit-not-have-radial-screws-for-the-blind-burrs)
   * [Positioning the Stationary / Top and Rotary / Bottom burrs](#positioning-the-stationary--top-and-rotary--bottom-burrs)
   * [Seasoning ](#seasoning)
   * [Installing Burrs with Regular Mounts](#installing-burrs-with-regular-mounts)
   * [What is the purpose of the foam inserts?](#what-is-the-purpose-of-the-foam-inserts)
   * [Carrier / Auger positioning](#carrier--auger-positioning)
   * [What is the "chirp-to-lock" measurement, and how do I optimize it?  ](#what-is-the-chirp-to-lock-measurement-and-how-do-i-optimize-it)
   * [My zero point seems off. What can I do?](#my-zero-point-seems-off-what-can-i-do)
   * [Is the grinder "permanently aligned"?  ](#is-the-grinder-permanently-aligned)
   * [What purpose do the “guiding pins” serve? How do I adjust them?](#what-purpose-do-the-guiding-pins-serve-how-do-i-adjust-them)
   * [I am concerned that the magnets may come off the carrier](#i-am-concerned-that-the-magnets-may-come-off-the-carrier)
- [Maintenance and troubleshooting](#maintenance-and-troubleshooting)
   * [I’m trying to remove a screw using the Zerno-branded tools that came with it, but it’s not working](#im-trying-to-remove-a-screw-using-the-zerno-branded-tools-that-came-with-it-but-its-not-working-the-tool-is-spinning-without-applying-any-torque)
   * [Where can I find a diagram for lubrication and what type of lubricant should I use?](#where-can-i-find-a-diagram-for-lubrication-and-what-type-of-lubricant-should-i-use)
- [Miscellaneous](#miscellaneous)
   * [My rotary carrier looks different](#my-rotary-carrier-looks-different)
   * [My Z1 makes a sound alternating in pitch](#my-z1-makes-a-sound-alternating-in-pitch)
   * [Why does my Z1 sound noisier than Will’s?](#why-does-my-z1-sound-noisier-than-wills)
 

## General usage

### I’m having trouble adjusting the grind finer with the grinder off

**Do not** adjust finer with the grinder turned off. Always switch it on before making finer adjustments to avoid coffee particles becoming trapped between the burrs. See [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lCVmR1QdfQI) for guidance. You can adjust coarser with the grinder off if you so desire.

### How can I manage retention and exchange when grinding?

When grinding fine for espresso, some grounds may retain inside. To release them, give the funnel a firm tap with your palm. Flick the chute a few times as well, but hold it steady to prevent it from falling into the catch cup. See [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lejbHtQ4akg) by Vel.

### How do I know if my Z1 has a ionizer? Why was one not included?

Initial batches included a ionizer beneath the stationary burr, but the new chute design removes the need for one, so ionizers are no longer included in newer units.

### Why are beans getting stuck before reaching the burrs? I’m using $number RDT sprays to reduce static

To reduce static without causing bean clumping, use only one or two RDT sprays. Some older Z1 batches were equipped with a non-toothed pre-breaker that occasionally retained beans. The Zerno store now offers a [V2 medium-speed auger](https://store.zerno.co/products/medium-feed-rate-v2-with-teeth) with a toothed design to address this issue.

### What grind setting should I be using for X and Y with burrs Z?

See [this spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1l_Q2Ebh48SsCl7b0TFkflBrK11kf-bfUthRuspAanuI/edit?usp=sharing) for settings used by other owners. Generally speaking:
- Espresso: anywhere between 50 and 200µm depending on the burr. Most likely 125 to 200µm
- Filter: most likely 500 to 700µm, with 600µm as a good starting point

### Why can’t I find a set screw for my funnel?

The funnel does not require set screws.

### How do I swap augers? I'd like to try the Slow-Feeding auger but I have no idea where to start

Swapping augers is a bit more involved than swapping blind burrs and requires the use of the provided tools. For a detailed guide, refer to [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OpRqx6cZvPw) by Vel. If you find yourself swapping augers frequently, consider reaching out to the Customer Service to purchase a “Z1 Prebreaker assembly” with “Prebreaker auger screws.” This will allow you to permanently mount a slow auger to a rotary carrier plate, making hot-swapping a breeze.

### How coarse can I go? How far past 700um? How many full rotations can I make?

You can adjust the dial very coarsely, making several full turns before unscrewing the adjustment assembly and having it come off (please don't). Generally speaking, you will never need to adjust the dial past 1400µm (two full rotations) for any purpose.


## Burrs, zeroing, and alignment

### How do I remove the stationary and rotary burrs, and where can I find the magnets?

See [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mjiCd3Z68U4) by Vel. To remove the stationary burr, use the two small magnets provided in the box. [They look like small, rounded handles](https://youtu.be/dBs0FxAFLn4?t=81). Place the magnets on opposite sides of the stationary burr’s face, and rock them gently; this should loosen the burr enough to pull it out. For the rotary burr, firmly tap the auger against the palm of your hand to release it.

### The stationary burr is stuck!

Sometimes, the stationary burr can get stuck after seasoning or grinding espresso for a while without switching them out. Don’t worry, it happens to everyone! Here are a couple of ways to fix it:

1. Grab the two magnets and put them on the same side next to each other. Gently pull them toward you and then let them go. Repeat this process until the coffee particles loosen and the burr breaks free.

2. If the burr is still stuck, use a pair of soft gloves to wiggle it axially (try to rotate it left and right). Then, use the magnets as in step 1.

### Why does my unit not have radial screws for the blind burrs?

Radial screws were phased out starting with batch 5, so they are no longer needed or included in the newer models.

### Positioning the Stationary / Top and Rotary / Bottom burrs

Most burrs don’t require a specific placement (like rotary vs. stationary) because their geometries are mirrored. However, some burrs (HU and CV3) have different geometries and can be installed as recommended by SSP. In the Z1, “stationary” or “top” burrs should be installed on the grinder’s body, while “rotary” or “bottom” burrs should be placed in the rotary carrier.

### Seasoning 

The necessity for seasoning is debated, and "how much" can vary depending on burr type and its coating. Generally speaking:
   - SSP MPv1 / Unimodal / "Brew" with Silver Knight coating (silver color): up to 5-7 kg (10-15 lbs)
   - SSP MPv1 / Unimodal / "Brew" with Red Speed coating (orange): 2-3 kg (4-5 lbs)
   - SSP MPv2 / Unimodal Espresso / "Multipurpose" with Red Speed coating (orange): 2-3 kg (4-5 lbs)
   - SSP HU / "High Uniformity" with Red Speed coating (orange): 2-3 kg (4-5 lbs)
   - SSP CV2 / "Cast V2" / "Lab Sweet" with Silver Knight coating: up to 5-7 kg (12-15 lbs)
   - SSP CV3 / "Cast V3" / "Lab Sweet" with Red Speed coating: likely 2-3kg (4-5 lbs)

The coating seems to account for the largest difference. Silver Knight Casts seem to benefit from the largest amount of seasoning.

### Installing Burrs with Regular Mounts

See [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W14p6aVplxo) by Vel. Use the screws from the accessory bag included with your unit, and the two foam pads. You should find all of that in the "goodie bag" that also containins spare parts such as burr screws, an Allen key, spare fuse, and SSP certificates.

### What is the purpose of the foam inserts?

The foam inserts are intended for regular (non-blind) burrs (see above), and prevent coffee grounds from building up behind the burrs. Place these inserts between the burr and the grinder body (or carrier) to prevent coffee particles from collecting behind the burrs.

### Carrier / Auger positioning

When inserting the rotary carrier/auger, ensure proper alignment. If the auger touches the stationary burr with light pressure, it’s correctly aligned. If it requires force, rotate the auger until it clicks, sinks onto the shaft, and engages properly.

### What is the "chirp-to-lock" measurement, and how do I optimize it?  

The "chirp-to-lock" refers to the difference in microns on the adjustment dial between two points:  
- **The "chirp" point** – where the burrs first make contact, producing a characteristic sound. (see [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=75M2g-MhhoY) for "false chirp" vs "real chirp")
- **The lock point** – where the burrs fully touch and lock **with the grinder powered off.**

This measurement typically ranges from **5 to 50 microns** and depends on how tightly the collar is secured past the chirp point.  

However, the "chirp-to-lock" distance _may_ vary based on the orientation of the keyed auger on the grinder shaft. To achieve the best alignment:  
1. Follow the steps described previously to lock the keyed auger onto the shaft properly, reassemble the front dial, and determine your current "chirp-to-lock" distance after zeroing the grinder. 
2. Flip the keyed auger 180 degrees and measure the "chirp-to-lock" distance again.  
3. Use the auger orientation that results in the smallest "chirp-to-lock" measurement for optimal alignment. 

### My zero point seems off. What can I do?

If the burrs chirp, it may indicate either contact between the burrs or trapped coffee particles. The chirp sounds different in each case; refer to [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=75M2g-MhhoY) for guidance.

### Is the grinder "permanently aligned"?  

The grinder's alignment is maintained by the **middle section**, which extends from the metal stand to just behind the bean opening. Provided the burr surfaces are perfectly flat, this design ensures the grinder remains permanently aligned **as long as the middle section remains untouched**.  

The following components can be disassembled, removed, and replaced without affecting the alignment:  
- Exterior metal shield  
- Metal stand / base
- [Motor](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04y7wSOKQSI)
- [Gearbox](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xznPYwoJmas)
- [PCB and switch](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cTfgFwxDbjc)
- [Front assembly and adjustment dial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NF0DCES3a8g)

And of course, the stationary and rotary burrs.

### What purpose do the “guiding pins” serve? How do I adjust them?

The “guiding pins” are the three protruding pins located on both carriers. Their function is to prevent the burr from slipping axially and rotating while the grinder is operating. It is commonly advised to "loosen the guiding pins by 1/4 of a turn" after screwing them in. This adjustment serves a specific purpose.

The pins are threaded, and screwing them all the way in prevents their movement. This, in turn, prevents them from adapting to small tolerances between different burrs, where the three  holes might be drilled in slightly different locations. When the “guiding pins” are loosened slightly, they allow sufficient slack for the pin to move freely and adapt to the variance between burrs. This ensures that the burr is never caught on a non-level plane due to a pin being slightly off-center due to its thread, resulting in an unwanted lift of the burr.

There is no specific “how much” to loosen the “guiding pins,” as long as they are free to move slightly. It is recommended to screw them in completely (without applying much force at all) and then loosen them by 1/4 of a turn.

### I am concerned that the magnets may come off the carrier

The magnets holding the burrs in place are captive and cannot be removed from the front, even though they appear loose. Vel has [shared](https://discord.com/channels/726985544038612993/1281828352113774612/1369683692582207498) the idea behind this design with some additional context.


## Maintenance and troubleshooting

### I’m trying to remove a screw using the Zerno-branded tools that came with it, but it’s not working. The tool is spinning without applying any torque!

To fix this, you need to extend the bit of the tool and tighten the grub screw on the flat spot of the tool bit. This will lock it into the handle and allow you to use it effectively. If you have a more recent unit, you should not have any issue with the new Wera-branded hex tool.


### Where can I find a diagram for lubrication and what type of lubricant should I use?

According to Vel, one component that can be optionally re-greased to mitigate potential knocking and enhance the user experience of the grinder is the slot on the main shaft where the auger key engages. It is advisable to re-grease this component when the factory grease becomes dry or is wiped off. Use Molykote 111 or a comparable food-safe lubricant for this purpose.


## Miscellaneous

### My rotary carrier looks different

Your rotary carrier may either be silver anodized and feature three holes for the radial set screws, or [black anodized](https://discord.com/channels/726985544038612993/1281828352113774612/1358343784013889606) and devoid of such holes. The latter is a newer revision. Vel provided the following [comment](https://discord.com/channels/726985544038612993/1281828352113774612/1358460346939216082):

> A few functional differences in the new carrier. The alignment surface on the back is now raised by 0.3mm. This allows for it to be machined in the same step as the front, where the burr sits and the opening that goes over the main shaft. Worked closely with my machinist on this update. There was a bit more room added in the back so the small bearing seat has no chance of touching the very middle of the carrier. This is why your bolts now sit about 0.2mm forward (going from memory on this one). 

> Last update was replacing the key with a ground dowel pin. The tolerances on the pin are much tighter than the key and it makes producing mating parts easier. Also a few users had issues with the key slipping out a bit and they had to push it back in. In the event the snap ring slipped it had to be re-inserted with snap ring pliers. Surprisingly all 3 people that reached out with that issue had some on hand. No such issue with the dowel pin. You can push it out with the provided Wera tool if you need to service. The spring remains the same.


### My Z1 makes a sound alternating in pitch

Does the sound resemble [this](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/1281828352113774612/1346808231611334758/PXL_20250305_112556773.TS2.mp4?ex=67c98868&is=67c836e8&hm=de2f213d120abb0e3320df0b706659163a71a709b9ad04b3eda3b3f8bba6daa0&)? If so, it is possible that the Z1 is drawing power from the same power strip or outlet as your kettle, espresso machine, or another power-hungry appliance. When the kettle or machine heating element turns on, the voltage drops, causing the Z1 to slow down and produce the alternating pitch change. To resolve this issue, you can either move the Z1 to a different outlet or use it between heating cycles.


### Why does my Z1 sound noisier than Will’s?

Will received a silent model.
